[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> If you're one of the 90%
of Americans who have suffered
from back pain, you know just
how frustrating it can be.
Healer Esther Gokhale believes
that back pain is largely
the result of improper posture.
She's the founder of the Gokhale
Method, a revolutionary program
that teaches people how
to use healthy posture
and movement to restore
their structural integrity
and banish pain.
Esther is the author
of bestseller "8 Steps
to a Pain-Free Back," and
has been dubbed the posture
guru of Silicon Valley.
Esther, welcome
to Healing Matrix.
>> Delighted to be here.
>> Yes, wonderful.
Just tell us a little bit
about your background.
How did you get interested
in healing in particular?
>> Healing because of my mother.
She was a registered
nurse from Holland.
Married my father, an Indian.
And while she was
in India, she took
care of sick orphans,
abandoned babies,
nursed them back to health.
And I saw some
pretty amazing things
happen, and was very
impressed and inspired
that unusual methods
could have an impact.
>> And did you have a particular
personal interest in back pain
in particular?
>> Well, I came to it the hard
way with my own very severe
problems.
I had a L5-S1 herniated
disc when I was
pregnant with my first child.
And I was trying all
the usual conservative
and alternative approaches
and not getting anywhere.
And eventually, I
had to have surgery.
At that point, it was a huge
herniation and two fragments
floating around in the canal.
And so that helped.
But then a year later, I
re-herniated the same disc.
And so that surgery hadn't
lasted as a result either.
And so I was forced to
cast my net wider and look
for something that
would help me.
>> Yes.
And then you traveled to
Paris and something unfolded.
>> I did.
The approaches that
resonated for me
were the ones that point
you to your own body
and the way you're using it.
And that included Alexander
Technique, and Feldenkrais,
and Aplomb, which is
a French technique.
And I spent an
entire year in Paris
and then several more
years in close association
with the Aplomb teachers.
And they were pointing to
indigenous people and ancestral
populations.
And that made sense to me.
When I was growing up
in India, my mother
would always point out to the
sweeper and the fruit seller
and point out how amazing
they were in the way they
used their bodies.
So anything that was
pointing to indigenous,
primal ways of using
your own body resonated.
And so I was diving into
the medical literature
to see if indeed there
were populations that had
lower incidence of back pain.
And then I started traveling
and filming and photographing
things I observed, interviewing
people, and discovering
that it really is
true that there
are populations that have a much
lower incidence of back pain.
And they sit differently, walk
differently, bend differently,
even lie down differently
than we in the modern west do.
>> We have video of Esther
in Burkina Faso, Africa.
Esther, tell us about
what we're seeing here.
>> So I am mimicking
this group of women,
who are walking with
weight on their heads.
And one of the things to observe
is how they use their glutes
to propel themselves forward.
Every step is a rep for their
gluteus maximus and gluteus
medius muscles.
You see how their behinds
are out behind them?
And it turns out
that mimicking people
who know what they're doing is
a particularly fantastic way
of learning posture.
Unfortunately,
we're copying what's
around us, which is not
such wonderful posture.
You know?
Most people today
slump and slouch.
And we, whether we like it or
not, whether we know it or not,
are copying what's around.
So having examples
of good posture
is just extremely helpful.
>> What were some of the
most profound observations
and conclusions that you've
drawn from your worldwide
research?
>> Well, one is that the
basic shape of the spine
in populations where they don't
have so much back pain and hip
arthritis and plantar fasciitis
and a host of musculoskeletal
problems is that they have what
I call a J spine rather than
an S spine, which is what
conventional wisdom describes
as normal for our species.
So the J is like a modern
J. Its like a hockey stick,
where the behind is
distinctly behind.
And then up above,
you don't have so much
of what's considered
a normal lumbar curve.
That portion of the
back in these people
is relatively
straight up and down.
So J spine rather than S spine.
And that is preserved
in sitting, in standing,
in walking.
And it has a host
of implications.
If your behind is behind, then
the glutes are in a position
to work, as we saw
in the video clip.
The glutes can propel the person
forward and tone themselves,
so now there's not the
need to go to a gym
and do all of these reps and
push weights around and so on.
These people are
exercising all day long.
>> Many people also say that
our sedentary lifestyle,
becoming computerized and
sitting down and all this,
is a contributor to back pain.
What's your take on that?
>> So I think sitting
has been much maligned.
If you go back a few decades,
standing was the bad guy.
You know, people in assembly
lines getting varicose veins.
And that's still true.
People who stand all day
have an increased risk
of atherosclerosis.
Your fine motor
skills are less good.
There are certain
kinds of focused
thinking that don't happen
as well when you're standing.
So there's a
downside to standing.
We used to be aware of it.
Now the fashions have changed.
Sitting's the bad guy.
I don't think either
is reasonable.
>> It's always something, right?
>> Well, it makes
for good headlines.
You know?
Sitting is the new smoking.
But if you really examine
the data, people who sit
do better than
people who are doing
manual labor in our society.
You have to earn
your living some way.
And the truth is that sitting
seems to actually protect you
from worse stuff happening.
So it's not really
fair to blame sitting.
And in fact, we all
do pretty badly.
But if you look at these
non-industrial cultures,
they do well and they
are actually sitting
just about as much as we do.
>> OK.
What about obesity,
stress, one's height,
those kinds of issues that
also we commonly hear people
say, well, of course
I've got this bad back.
I'm this tall and I'm
always trying to--
you know, this kind of thing?
>> Yes.
So I look at it a little bit
like you look at construction.
If you have a
skyscraper, you know,
a little bit taller, if it's
well aligned, is not a problem.
If it's a little broader,
and it's well aligned,
not a problem.
And I think it's similar
with human beings.
If we were well aligned, there's
not a very strong correlation
with weight and height.
But if you are poorly
aligned, then every inch
counts against you and every
ounce counts against you.
And so I think it's
the combination
of poor structure, poor
musculoskeletal health,
and these other factors.
Then everything
counts against you.
>> And of course, the
question is going to come up.
What about aging and
natural wear and tear?
You know, am I supposed to be
in pain because I'm in my 70s?
Or you know, what's
the story there?
>> So I think we're designed
to last well for our natural
lives.
>> Lifetime guarantee we're
supposed to have on this body,
right?
It should last a lifetime.
>> But the problem is, we don't
arrive with the user's manual.
And then that causes increasing
wear and tear and degeneration.
And then like height and weight,
age becomes a problem, too.
So in our courses, we have
seen 100-year-olds, babies,
and everything in between.
And you can always help people
improve their structure.
And people are usually
very astonished at how much
of an effect that has on
their pains and aches.
Aches and pains are
like nature trying
to tell you, hey, do
something different.
>> Pay attention here.
I'm trying to get
your attention.
So let's just take a
look at this image.
If you could explain to
us what we're seeing here.
>> So we're seeing an
old-fashioned French magazine
cover.
So this is pre-World
War I. And you
see how the back of the
neck is very elongated,
the chin angles down
in the woman standing?
And her shoulders
are open and broad.
This is what is
truly good posture.
It's stylized, there's
some clothes around it.
But this is what I consider
old-fashioned good posture.
>> So it's an enlongation
in the cervical spine.
>> In the neck, in the back.
And then the behind's behind.
A J spine again.
>> So the J spine.
So this is what it looks like.
And then an alternative posture
that we've gotten into trouble
with after World War--
>> I, roughly.
>> So can you speak to us
about what we're seeing here?
>> So you see in this
French magazine cover,
the newer fashion.
You see how the
pelvis is tucked,
how the neck
extends forward, how
the shoulders are
protruding, and the chest
becomes much more flat.
It's a whole different
way of being in the body.
And this has been our
fashion ever since.
You know, this is what remains
cool on the runways today.
And it's very different
and much less healthy.
>> As we are seeing these images
and you're describing this S
and J relationship, can you just
again share with us the J curve
and how someone can know
if they are in it or not,
and as it relates to
what we're seeing here?
>> On the left, you have
the classic S-shaped spine,
the S spine that you find
in every modern anatomy book
and chiropractic chart.
And it is the basis for lumbar
support, lumbar pillows,
every car seat
having lumbar support
to fit what is thought to
be a natural sort of curve
in the small of the back.
On the right, you have
a picture of the spine
from an anatomy book
published in 1911.
And it shows what I'm
calling the J spine.
And you see how the behind
is very much behind.
But right above the behind,
you see that the lumbar spine
is relatively straight.
And I'm arguing that that
makes a whole lot more sense
and it correlates
with back health.
And there are radiologic
studies demonstrating that.
And you can use
common-sensical arguments
because in that J spine, all
the discs' cylindrical shape
is respected.
And the vertebrae are
not edgewise compressed.
And the wedge shape
of the L5-S1 disc,
the very lowest
disc in our spine,
that adapted to becoming
wedge-shaped as part
of being bipedal.
And that wedge
shape is respected.
So you have the behind behind.
And that just makes a whole
lot more sense in so many ways.
>> It's very interesting for
us to be bringing this forth,
and we've been through so
many changes through this time
period that you're
speaking about.
I can see the correlation about
what might be happening here.
And you have something
super exciting to share
with us that is a tool that
allows us to monitor what
the spine is doing in
real time, that can even
act as a biofeedback
type of teacher
for us to see how we're
orienting ourselves
inside the body and
utilizing our spine.
So can you tell us a little
bit about this spine tracker
that you have with us today?
>> So this consists of
five sensors that get stuck
to the spine.
So this is something we've
invented over the last five
years.
I have one on my back and
would be happy to demo it.
>> Sure.
>> It is stuck to my
spine, so there it is.
Yeah?
>> Yes.
>> With the lowest one--
>> So these electrode--
>> --on my--
>> --type things.
OK.
>> --sacrum.
Yes.
So the sensors are talking
to our app in real time.
So it gives a real time read
of the shape of my spine.
And what I can do with
this is mark a target.
So I consider this a
good seated position,
and I'm going to mark
that as a target.
And now when a student
comes back to their position
and they are sitting some
different way, they can tell,
oops.
That's not exactly--
>> A sway back.
>> A sway.
>> Or if their tucking
their pelvis and slouching--
>> Yeah, pelvis -- they see it.
>> --too much.
Yes.
>> And then they learn
what it is they need to do
in their body to
match the target.
>> Yes.
>> And with some students
we like to make it even more
colorful.
So we have a
simulation of what's
going on on the
inside of their body,
so they can see that when
they sway that it actually
loads their discs.
>> And compressing--
>> And if they slump, then it
loads the discs differently.
>> Yes.
>> So they take home in
a very visceral way--
>> Yes.
>> --why it is that they need
to pay attention to this--
>> Yes.
>> --to the shape
of their spine.
That there are actually
nuts and bolts in there--
>> Yes.
>> --that merit some attention.
>> Need to be used properly.
>> Yes.
And then gives them
practice in matching targets
for sitting, for
standing, for bending.
So this has been
very useful for us
for helping students learn
more efficiently and also
for doing research.
>> Raising consciousness
in the biomechanics.
And this is inside the
classroom where you teach,
where you're training people
how to do exactly what we're
talking about.
>> So most of our teachers
use this as part of their way
of helping students understand,
learn what they need to do.
And then we also track
all the snapshots
on the student's records
so that they can see what
their progress is over time.
>> Yes.
So what do you think about the
conventional recommendations
for back problems?
Obviously, it's not
this, but other things.
Examples, surgery, medicating,
rehabilitation in other ways.
What do you think about--
>> Well, sometimes like what
every parent tells their kids,
sit up straight, is
just plain wrong.
It's misguided.
Many, many of the interventions
out there are helpful,
but they deal with symptoms.
It's sort of a hack,
it's a Band-Aid.
Without understanding what's
at the root of the problem,
we can make the pain
disappear by doing pain meds
or by injecting or--
but I think it's really
important at some stage
in the game to address
the root of the problem.
The reason we have pain, that's
nature's way of saying, hey.
Something's not quite right.
And then we need to not
just kill the messenger
or ignore the messenger.
We need to understand the
messenger, do the necessary,
and move forward.
>> Yeah.
What do you think about
the standard advice
that most physicians would
give us about staying active?
You have to stay active,
or in other situations
to completely lay in
bed until this heals.
What-- how do you
work with that?
How do you make those decisions?
>> So laying in
bed is old school.
That's no longer recommended.
And that's a good thing,
because it turns out
that's not very helpful.
Staying active, I think,
is a good piece of advice,
but it could be
done so much better.
Obviously, you have to
do what your body allows.
You have to tune
in, and sometimes
less active,
sometimes more active.
But a key thing
that's missing is
how are you going to be active?
What is the shape of your spine?
What are your body mechanics
as you go about being active?
And that's key,
because we all know
of people who have
injured themselves
while being active in sports
or just tying their shoelaces.
So just saying be active without
any further specifications,
we know, doesn't always
land a good result.
But active plus with
good posture is fabulous.
>> Yes.
The right kind of
active goes a long way.
>> Yes.
>> Right?
So what is your relationship
with other modalities,
other disciplines,
chiropractic, acupuncture,
physical therapists, et cetera.
What-- osteopathy.
What is the interaction there?
>> So I think collaboration
works particularly well,
because these are highly skilled
people who have been trained
for years and can do wonders
for inflammations or all sorts
of things.
There's a missing
piece, which is what
we try to bring to the table.
Which is like after you've had
your adjustment or your surgery
or your injection, what are
you doing when you go home?
How are you bending?
How are you sitting?
So we help people do
their part, and that
makes all of these
other interventions
so much more effective,
holds so much better.
>> Sustainable--
>> Yes.
>> --and integrative.
>> And so I think collaboration
is the right way to go.
The people who have
been the most receptive
have been the primary care
physicians, because they
are the ones who are facing
complaining patients who
have back problems, get
sent someplace, come back
with the same problem.
And we know from the research
and we know from our--
most people's experience
that most things
don't work very well or
they don't hold very well.
People keep coming back
with the same problems.
And so they appreciate it.
>> And the standard primary care
physician wasn't really trained
in biomechanics and
prevention and--
>> Correct
>> --those kinds of things.
>> So there is no turf--
>> They're a totally
different discipline.
>> Yeah.
>> So they're thrilled
to have you on the scene,
showing everyone what to do--
>> Yeah.
>> --instead of some of the
other more dramatic modalities
that would have to get suggested
in these circumstances.
How do you feel about lumbar
support, cervical pillows,
these kinds of supports as
people are sitting or sleeping,
et cetera?
>> So, again, it depends what
sort of philosophy they are
informed by.
So if it's a lumbar
support pillow,
trying to create extra
lumbar curve where I think it
should be more
lengthened and flat,
and then I'm not so thrilled.
We have created our own
props to help people
undo some of the extra curves.
And so in the cervical
area, we actually
like the neck to be taller
and straighter rather than
extra curve.
Now if you already have a
curve, it's nice to support--
acknowledge what's going
on and support the neck
as you steadily improve it.
For the lumber area, we
have a Stretchsit cushion,
which I will be
demonstrating to you later,
that reduces lumbar curve
rather than increases it.
>> Mm-hmm.
And so this is the aid
that you do recommend.
>> Yeah.
So I think aids can
be really helpful,
but they just need
to be well-informed.
They need to have the right
philosophy guiding them
and not be counterproductive.
>> Can you show us how the
Stretchsit cushion works?
>> I'd be delighted.
>> OK.
Excellent.
Show us what's happening here.
>> So the chair, as you can
see, has these sticky nubs,
and that offers friction.
So the idea is that
the person sitting
would lengthen their spine,
hook up against the cushion,
and then be a little taller
And basically have traction.
And I'll demo.
So we teach people to put their
bum well back in the chair,
and then come away
from the sticky nubs
and then elongate their spine.
First by curving
forward and that
undoes whatever extra
lumbar curve they have.
>> OK.
>> And then grabbing either
the pillow or some part
of the chair to make
the back even taller.
And then hooking the
back to the sticky nubs.
And now the back
is getting a boost
whereas previously the back
was just short and compressed
and getting all kinds
of wear and tear.
So that's extremely
helpful way to make
sitting not only more
comfortable, but also more
therapeutic.
>> So rather than the
compressive forces,
you're actually tractioning
as you're seated.
>> Exactly.
>> Yes.
>> Yeah.
>> So beautiful combination.
So informative, traction
while you're sitting, amazing.
It brings to mind something
that many people also
have feet issues.
And oftentimes,
traction helps that.
It makes me think
about, is there
something that you can share
with us about the biomechanics
related to the spine and posture
and how it translates down
to the issue of foot pain?
>> Like the ditty goes, the
foot bone's connected to the leg
bone, and the leg bone's
connected to-- so yes.
I'm definitely in the camp
of everything is connected--
>> You bet.
>> --very literally.
In particular, the
way most people
stand, they park their hips
forward and put a lot of weight
on the front of the foot.
And this is easy on all the leg
muscles which get to turn off.
But every joint,
knee, hip, spine,
is put under stress in
this way and in the foot.
So that, as well
as the way people
walk where they tend to lift
their heel way too early,
puts a lot of stress on
the front of the foot
and leads to things
like plantar fasciitis
and Morton's neuroma and all--
bunions and all sorts
of common ailments
that there really isn't
a very good way around.
Once your foot is in
trouble, now what do you do?
I've had people crawl into
my office in desperation.
>> So you're recommending longer
on the heel before the heel
lift--
>> Yes.
>> --as they're moving into
the heel strike in front, yes?
>> Yes.
So the heel, as you know
in our species, is huge.
It's dense.
It has cross fiber construction.
It is made for weight bearing.
>> Yes.
>> And leaving the weight
there, both in standing as well
as in a prolonged way in
walking, makes a lot of sense.
And it's the way that these
indigenous people walk.
And that, for me, is
always the bottom line.
It also allows the foot to then
do normal human foot things,
like grab the ground.
And in that process, get its
exercise and its therapy.
You know, we're self
exercising, self-healing.
>> Yes.
And so much happens there with
lymphatic pumping and allowing
all kinds of fluids to become
mobilized and healthy tissues.
It's a very important
piece of our humanity
that gets certainly ruled
out in our culture so much.
So can you tell us about the
Gokhale Method specifically,
how it's laid out in the book
and what a reader might be
able to anticipate and dive in.
>> It's a step-by-step series
of instructions on how to sit,
stand, lie down,
bend, walk, lift.
But it starts with
how I think is
the safest and
best way to start,
which is elongate the spine.
So it's like preparing the clay.
So I like people to begin
with stretch sitting.
It's easy.
There's no downside
if it's done gently.
And then people are encouraged,
because they feel relief
right away.
Stretch lying on the back is one
of these other techniques that
is easy, lot of
bang for the buck,
and now people feel energized
to invest a little more effort
in the other techniques,
which take a little bit more
than a few seconds of learning.
>> But it teaches
them how to do that?
>> Yeah.
It teaches people step-by-step.
The best way is
always to get a coach.
I mean, it is a
kinesthetic thing.
It's like learning to
play golf or tennis.
And having a coach
tell you that, no, you
don't look like a gorilla,
and take a picture of you
and show you that.
You may feel like
you're leaning forward
because it's so different from
what you were doing previously,
which was arching back, but
it looks perfectly wonderful.
And so having a coach encourage
you and guide you to the result
is the best way.
And now I have trained over 50
teachers all around the world,
and they're able to provide
this hands on guidance.
But the book is a really
good starting point,
It gives a overview.
It makes sense.
People feel encouraged,
and it starts people
on the journey with
these easy techniques,
like stretch sitting
and stretch lying.
>> What would you share with
our viewers that you feel are
the most important initial
techniques of the Gokhale
Method?
>> I think stretch lying is a
really good one as with stretch
sitting.
And squeezing the
glutes with every step
can also be very
safe and effective
and helps balance
and things like that.
>> Esther has already shown
us how to stretch sit.
Another of the key exercises,
as she's just mentioning,
is stretch lying.
And we have a video of
her demonstrating it here.
>> Now we're going to learn
another simple technique called
stretch lying.
Stretch lying will make
you sleep more comfortably.
Begin by bending your
knees and placing your feet
hip width apart on the bed.
Prop your upper body
onto your elbows,
and now dig your elbows in
and push towards your feet,
putting one vertebra down.
Now you don't want to
jut out your rib cage.
You want to put one
vertebra down at a time
and uncurl onto the bed.
That's great.
Now you bring your
hands behind your neck
and elongate the
back of your neck.
And you want to not jut
the chin up, but rather
leave the neck elongated
and the chin down.
And then move your
hands out of the way.
And keeping the traction that
you've created in your back,
you are going to slide
your shoulders down
towards your feet.
Great.
Now straighten out
the knees and let
the knees slightly externally
rotate and lay on the pillow.
Looks good.
Lucy, if you can bring the
pillow under your shoulders,
that would be
better because that
helps you curve
your ribcage forward
and elongate your low back.
Do this for only five
minutes of the night,
but you may be surprised
that you stay there
for a longer period because
your body is so comfortable.
Many people tell me they
wake up in the same position
that they went to sleep
in, and they're shocked.
>> Who'd have thought we have
to be instructed so much on just
how to lay?
But obviously it's
making a big difference.
What are some of the
most dramatic cases
of healing that you have
seen with your method?
>> So many.
I'm thinking of a
retired psychiatrist who
was one of the few people
who came in where I didn't
see very much hope,
because things
had gone so far south with him.
He was on pain meds and barely
able to go through the day.
And within just a
couple of sessions,
he had quit taking
his pain meds.
He continued working with
me, now doing dance lessons.
It was very dramatic.
And he then invited me
to his 90th birthday
where he wanted me to teach
all his guests how to Samba.
So he went from being
in really bad trouble
to having a very nice last
seven years of his life.
And there are so many.
Joan Baez is an example.
She recently gives the
Gokhale Method credit
for being able to tour at
age 78 all around the world,
and that's very gratifying.
She is really remarkable
in her physicality,
and to be given credit
for that, it was very--
>> That's so
rewarding, isn't it?
>> --rewarding.
>> You're making a
difference in people's lives.
Esther has countless
testimonials
of people who have gone
through her course.
Here's what one client, an
internal medicine doctor,
had to say.
>>JESSICA DAVIDSON: Before I
took the class with Esther,
I wasn't able to
sit on the floor
to play with my new
baby for even a minute.
And that was what prompted
me to take Esther's class.
I would get low back pain
anytime I sat on the floor.
I tend to be a big skeptic
about alternative medicine,
and I don't think
I would have taken
the course if Esther hadn't
described it so compellingly.
The benefits from
taking Esther's course
were immediate and
felt miraculous to me.
I think I started feeling
it from the first class.
And I was able, shortly
after starting the class,
to sit on the floor, and then
I've been able since then
to sit on the floor, essentially
for as long as I want.
If I had to give
you three adjectives
to describe this
work, I would say
miraculous has to be one,
because you just can't believe
how much difference it makes.
Natural is another
one, because it just
seems the natural way
for the human body to be.
And easy.
It's easy to do this.
>> One of the Gokhale Method
trainers who has facilitated
some of these remarkable
transformations is actually
Esther's daughter, Monisha,
and she's joining us here.
Welcome, Monisha.
>> Thank you.
>> Wonderful to have you here.
So you have to tell
us, what was it
like growing up with
the posture guru?
>> What it means is that healthy
posture actually came naturally
to me.
I was raised in a way that meant
that healthy posture habits
were part of my everyday life.
The way she carried me,
the way she adjusted me,
all led to me approaching
sitting and standing
and bending and
lying in ways that
are actually healthy for
my structural integrity.
A lot of people
think that growing up
with a posture
teacher as a mother
might be unpleasant,
because people's
ideas of healthy posture is
some tense, unpleasant position.
But, in fact, most of
posture is relaxed.
And healthy posture
is comfortable.
>> Did you have good
posture at birth?
>> I think--
I think all babies
are actually born
with natural, healthy alignment.
And part of the
role of the parent
is to help maintain those
natural posture habits.
So yeah, I think all babies are
born with natural alignment.
And the way Esther
carried me and sat me up
and held me helped me
maintain a healthy posture
habits into my adult life.
>> So how did your education
on correct posture do you--
how do you feel that it
improved your life experience
along the way?
>> Well, one of the impacts of
having healthy posture habits
is my expectations on my
musculoskeletal health as I
age.
Many people in our culture
see how common back pain
is and expect that they're going
to have back pain at some point
if they haven't already.
I have a lot of
confidence in sitting
and standing and
bending and being active
while maintaining
structural integrity,
and so I don't expect
to have back pain.
I never have had back issues or
major chronic musculoskeletal
issues, and I don't expect
to develop those as I age.
Another really
important thing for me
is its impact on my
life as an athlete.
Being an athlete is
really important to me.
It's a big part of who I am.
And having healthy posture
has, one, improved performance.
Good form and good posture
is a really big piece
of being an effective athlete,
and also on injury prevention
as well as when injuries
do happen, injury recovery.
>> So how and when did you
decide to become involved with
the Gokhale Method?
>> Informally, I would say I've
been involved since before I
was born and since birth.
But formally--
>> It's kind of a
no-choice choice?
>> Exactly.
I've been raised
in a way that means
that I've been implementing a
lot of healthy posture habits
even before I knew
formally or in an educated
way what healthy posture meant.
But I did in some point
take our foundation's course
and learn in a
formal way what it
meant to have healthy
posture habits
and healthy
structural integrity.
And then went on to train
to be a Gokhale Method
teacher about eight years ago.
And ever since, I've been--
I started teaching alongside
my studying at Stanford.
I was a computer science major.
And in summer as
an in-between, I
did a little bit of
teaching on the side.
And two years ago, I
formally joined full time.
>> Esther, in what other ways
do people benefit from improving
their posture?
>> Well, they improve all of
their joints and muscle health.
That's the nuts and bolts
of the obvious ways.
But they also report that
they're sleeping better,
that they breathe better.
Their digestion improves
because their organs now
have more room, better
orientation, better blood
supply, better nerve supply.
So they get results that
they weren't expecting.
And then there's the
whole psychological piece
that people feel more confident.
Other people are responding
to them differently.
So there's a whole layered
series of benefits.
>> And is there data supporting
the work that you're doing?
>> So we've done
in-house studies,
and we expected the result that
people are improving pretty
dramatically from the beginning
to the end of the course.
Our study followed
these students one month
beyond the course.
And I wasn't sure if they would
forget more or integrate more,
and it turns out
they keep improving.
So integrating is more important
than forgetting, it turns out.
There's a crowdsourcing website
called healthoutcome.org,
and we are the number
one rated intervention
for lower back pain.
And this is a matter of
great satisfaction and pride,
because this is not our website.
This is a third party website,
having nothing to do with us,
and actually teaching
something competitive.
And we just rate
head and shoulders
above everything else, so
that was delightful to see.
And now there are an increasing
number of research studies
cropping up, so in
the next year or two
we expect to be able to report
on randomized controlled trials
and several other
research efforts.
>> Beautiful.
So where can people go to
learn more about your program?
>> The website is our
hub, gokhalemethod.com.
Spelled funny,
G-O-K-H-A-L-E Method.
And that's where all of
our teacher's offerings
throughout the world are listed.
So we have 50 teachers.
Many of them travel.
If people would like one of
our teachers to travel to them,
that's also possible when
we have enough demand.
I'm currently on tour
teaching our one day
pop up course all
over the country.
Either students come
to one of our hubs,
or we travel to
groups of students.
And that's how we're
spreading the word.
But they can also learn
a lot from the book
and from the free online
workshops that we offer
and from the numerous resources.
And some people choose to start
with the Stretchsit cushion,
or we have a chair
that we've designed.
And those can be very
easy access points,
not so much learning
immediate benefit.
And so for some people
that suits best.
It doesn't matter
how they start.
We just encourage
people to do something--
>> Just begin.
>> --take the first baby step.
>> Yes
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah, wonderful.
Thank you so much to both
of you for being here,
and thank you for bringing
forth a solution for us
and sharing this with
us today for an issue
that so many people
are plagued with.
So thank you so
much for being here.
>> Thanks.
>> Thank you.
>> It's been a delight
to be interviewed by you.
>> Oh, my pleasure.
My pleasure.
In our quest for
natural solutions
to end pain and
experience true vitality,
the Gokhale Method is
an amazing resource.
By working with posture, we
can regain the ease of body
that is our birthright.
Thank you for joining
us on "Healing Matrix."
I'm Dr. Sue Morter.
[MUSIC PLAYING]